---
layout: post
title: Setting up CherryPy
subtitle: a minimalist python web framework
tags: [rdkit, python, cherrypy]
comments: true
---

[CherryPy](https://cherrypy.org/) is a minimalist python web framework. You may ask what "minimalist" means in the context of web frameworks? It does not offer any front-end tools and does not offer any ORM. But you can use one of your choice if you whish to do so. It's unopinionated. You can access your data directly with the according database-specific library (cx_Oracle, psycopg2,...) or combine it with SQLAlchemy. It's up to you. I really prefer it for creating simple web services that can be used over multiple bigger applications. In this blog post I will outline how to setup CherryPy focusing also on having it "production ready" on an Ubuntu server.

## Installing CherryPy

CherryPy is available via pip or conda. Back when I started using it, the build on conda was outdated. Right now it's up to date but looking at the history I'm not sure the official maintainers regularly update the conda builds. Since this is a pure python module I suggest to stick with the official guide and install CherryPy via pip. We will use a conda environment so you will need to have anaconda or miniconda already installed.

```bash
conda create -c rdkit -n cherrypy python=3.7 rdkit
conda activate cherrypy
conda install pip
pip install cherrypy
```

We will use python 3.7 because RDKit as of now does not have an official 3.8 build available on conda and the end-goal will be to build webservices that make use of RDKit functionality. You may also install additional packages into this environment as per your needs.

You can test the installation by running the `Hellow World` tutorial:

```python
python -m cherrypy.tutorial.tut01_helloworld
```

And then open http://127.0.0.1:8080/ in your browser which should display "Hello world!".

## Running CherryPy applications

Actually with above test you already ran your first CherryPy app! But of course there is more to it. CherryPy ships with it's own integrated HTTP/1.1-compliant, WSGI thread-pooled Web Server which is production ready. In fact you can use it to serve any WSGI-based python web application even if not built with CherryPy framework. It can also [serve static files](https://docs.cherrypy.org/en/latest/basics.html#static-content-serving). Depending on your needs and setup, nothing else is required. 

### CherryPy standalone

To run CherryPy as standalone application without any other web server, you can simply look at the [tutorials](https://docs.cherrypy.org/en/latest/tutorials.html#id3) and expand on them. The `Hello world` example we used to test the installation looks as follow:

```python
import cherrypy


class HelloWorld(object):
    @cherrypy.expose
    def index(self):
        return "Hello world!"


if __name__ == '__main__':
    cherrypy.quickstart(HelloWorld())
```

The application needs a main method which launches CherryPy webserver and the application itself. By default it will bind to 127.0.0.1:8080. An application is a class and available actions are methods that are annotated with `@cherrypy.expose`. The `index`method has special meaning as it is accessible to the base url of the application. You can add a second method to the class that will generate a random string:

```python
import random
import string
import cherrypy


class StringGenerator(object):
    @cherrypy.expose
    def index(self):
        return "Hello world!"

    @cherrypy.expose
    def generate(self):
        return ''.join(random.sample(string.hexdigits, 8))


if __name__ == '__main__':
    cherrypy.quickstart(StringGenerator())

```

If you save this into a file and run it (`python tut02.py`), the `generate`method will be available at  http://localhost:8080/generate. 

To bind to a different host and port, you need to explicitly configure this. Change the main function to include a configuration dictionary like below and adjust the host and port accordingly.

```python
if __name__ == '__main__':
    conf = {
        '/': {
            'server.socket_host': '192.168.0.100',
            'server.socket_port': 80
        }
    }
    cherrypy.quickstart(StringGenerator(), '/', conf)
```

### CherryPy behind Apache (on Ubuntu)

In this section I will outline one of multiple way to run CherryPy behind Apache in a more "production-like" manner than standalone. We will use mod_proxy with Apache acting as reverse proxy.  I would expect the steps for other web servers like nginx to be similar.  

1. Install Apache

    ```bash
    sudo apt update
    sudo apt install apache2
    ```

2. Enable `mod_proxy

    ```bash
    sudo a2enmod proxy_http
    ```

3. Add Location directive to Apache configuration located at `/etc/apache2/sites-enabled/000-default.conf`

    ```
    <Location /cherrypy-app>
    	Order allow,deny
    	allow from all
    	ProxyPass http://127.0.0.1:8080
    	ProxyPassReverse http://127.0.0.1:8080
    </Location>
    ```
    You may adjust the location path to a more meaningful name. Note that the path must be identical to the path your CherryPy application is binding to.  Eg.

    ```python
    cherrypy.quickstart(StringGenerator(), '/cherrypy-app', conf)
    ```

    It does not need to be the actual file path the python file containing the application.

    The port can also be changed but you must keep the chosen port in mind as it will be needed again later on.

4. Adjust app configuration

    To make CherryPy work with `mod_proxy` you need to enable CherryPys proxy tool. Add `'tools.proxy.on':True` to the CherryPy configuration in your application. This is needed if you want to know the actual source of your requests inside your CherryPy application and logs. If the tool is not enabled, all requests seem to come from localhost.

5. Start CherryPy on system start using systemd

    To start CherryPy webserver and application automatically on system start, we can create a new systemd unit. In `/lib/systemd/system` add a new file `cherrypy.service`. Note that this needs root privileges.  I usually use the file explorer of the distro with root privilege to create and then edit the files on the dev machine and just copy these over to the server which has no GUI.

    In the new file add below content and adjust paths accordingly:

    ```ini
    [Unit]
    Description=Cherrypy Web Server
    
    [Service]
    Type=simple
    WorkingDirectory=/var/www/cherrypy/
    ExecStart=/opt/anaconda/envs/cherrypy/bin/python /var/www/cherrypy/cherrypy_server.py
    
    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target
    ```

    Important is to set the correct path to the python environment to use and the cherrypy application. For now as a placeholder for an actual application you can use the previously created tutorial application.

5. Enable [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activation.html) with systemd

    CherryPy is fully compatible with socket activation. I would be lying if I completely understood the advantage of enabling socket activation but it is recommended by CherryPy creators. Basically it should lead to faster server startup and less resource usage.  For me the big part is that it shifts network binding from the application to the system which I say is a good thing. Instead of having to bind to a specific host and port within the python code, this is now handled by the system configuration. Makes sense right? The code shouldn't define such system level settings.

    In `/lib/systemd/system` create a new file named `cherrypy.socket`. Adjust IP and port number to your needs.

    ```ini
    [Unit]
    Description=CherryPy Socket
    PartOf=cherrypy.service
    
    [Socket]
    ListenStream=127.0.0.1:8080
    
    [Install]
    WantedBy=sockets.target
    ```

6. Enable the new configuration

    To enable the new systemd configuration made above, below commands need to be executed:

    ```bash
    sudo systemctl daemon-reload
    sudo systemctl enable cherrypy.socket
    sudo systemctl enable cherrypy.service
    ```

    If you now restart your system CherryPy will automatically be started and listen for connections on the defined address and port.

## Conclusion

We now have a our system setup to be able to create CherryPy-based web services. I specifically call these web services because for a full-blown application, a full stack framework like django might be more suitable. However with CherryPy we can easily create a webservice, say for structure image generation, that can be used by multiple other web applications. And that is exactly what a future post will be about.
