---
layout: post
title: An Introduction
subtitle: What to expect form this blog
tags: [general]
comments: true
---

Dear reader, welcome to my blog. My name is Joos Kiener. I have a background in biology. After my
masters I transitioned into the area of research IT. I have experience with research informatics
systems, database design, web application development and data science topics like ETL, data
analysis and machine learning. While gathering this experience and knowledge I also completed a MAS
(Master of Advanced Studies) in Computer Science and a DAS (Diploma of Advanced Studies) in Data
Science. In this context "Advanced Studies" means that you can only enter the course if you have a
prior degree in a relevant field and that you are expected to know the basics already like algebra
for computer science or programming/python for data science.

In summary I'm a Jack of all trades having relevant skills in many areas and being able to bring
them together in a useful, practical and efficient way. But don't expect me to explain you the inner
workings of ResNet or design a new architecture from scratch. 

## Blog content

I expect to post helpful tricks and methods around working with chemical and biological information
using KNIME, python and RDKit. There certainly will also be less or non-technical background post
and posts about recent publications I found interesting. Albeit given the current state of
publishing it will be much more likely I will rant about yet another not very convincing application
of ML or "AI" in the general field of chemical research. I do seem agree with [Pat Walters](https://practicalcheminformatics.blogspot.com/) [posts](https://practicalcheminformatics.blogspot.com/2020/05/some-thoughts-on-comparing.html)
about the state of publishing in regards to ML and "AI".

## About statistics

I'm not very well versed in statistical methods. I admit it. So if you recognize any issues or
errors in future post regarding this, don't hesitate to comment and explain the found issue. But
then I don't publish papers in this area. Too much work for what exactly? I like pragmatism over
absolute correctness. A simple way to test a model in addition to say cross-validation or putting it
into production and check the outcome (Who has the patience for that?) is simply to apply it on some
"large" database\*. If your model predicts a large fraction of these >100K compounds to be active,
you know something can't be right even if the performance metrics from CV and test set look good. 

\*Â of course the molecules in the database should be relevant for the model you are testing.

